Array Insertions

In the previous chapter, we looked at how to write elements to an Array. 
There is a lot more to inserting elements though, as we're about to see!

Inserting a new element into an Array can take many forms:

Inserting a new element at the end of the Array.
Inserting a new element at the beginning of the Array.
Inserting a new element at any given index inside the Array.


Inserting at the End of an Array
At any point in time, we know the index of the last element of the Array, 
as we've kept track of it in our length variable. All we need to do for 
inserting an element at the end is to assign the new element to one index 
past the current last element.


This is pretty much the same as we've already seen. Here's the code to make 
a new Array that can hold up to 6 items, and then add items into the first 
3 indexes.


Let's define a function, printArray, to help us visualise what's happening.


If we run our printArray function, we'll get the following output.

Index 0 contains 0.
Index 1 contains 1.
Index 2 contains 2.
Index 3 contains 0.
Index 4 contains 0.
Index 5 contains 0.
Notice how indexes 3, 4, and 5 all contain 0? This is because Java fills 
unused int Array slots with 0s.

Let's now add a 4th element. We'll add the number 10.


Notice why we also incremented the length? It is significant to increase the 
length by 1. If skipping this step, next time when we add another element, 
we'll accidentally overwrite the one we just added!

Running printArray again, we'll get the following:

Index 0 contains 0.
Index 1 contains 1.
Index 2 contains 2.
Index 3 contains 10.
Index 4 contains 0.
Index 5 contains 0.


Inserting at the Start of an Array
To insert an element at the start of an Array, we'll need to shift all other 
elements in the Array to the right by one index to create space for the new 
element. This is a very costly operation, since each of the existing elements 
has to be shifted one step to the right. The need to shift everything implies 
that this is not a constant time operation. In fact, the time taken for 
insertion at the beginning of an Array will be proportional to the length 
of the Array. In terms of time complexity analysis, this is a linear time 
complexity: 

O
(
N
)
O(N), where 
N
N is the length of the Array.


Here's what this looks like in code.


And here's the result of running printArray.

Index 0 contains 20.
Index 1 contains 0.
Index 2 contains 1.
Index 3 contains 2.
Index 4 contains 10.
Index 5 contains 0.


Inserting Anywhere in the Array
Similarly, for inserting at any given index, we first need to shift all the 
elements from that index onwards one position to the right. Once the space is 
created for the new element, we proceed with the insertion. If you think about 
it, insertion at the beginning is basically a special case of inserting an element 
at a given index—in that case, the given index was 0.


Again, this is also a costly operation since we could potentially have to shift 
almost all the other elements to the right before actually inserting the new 
element. As you saw above, shifting lots of elements one place to the right 
adds to the time complexity of the insertion task.

Here's what it looks like in code.


And here's the result of running printArray.

Index 0 contains 20.
Index 1 contains 0.
Index 2 contains 30.
Index 3 contains 1.
Index 4 contains 2.
Index 5 contains 10.


Does that all sound good? The main thing to be careful of is remembering that 
array.length gives you the total capacity of the Array. If you want to know the 
last used slot, you'll need to keep track of this yourself using a length 
variable. Other than that, just be careful to read any elements you want to 
keep, before you overwrite them!

We now have a fun problem for you to test your understanding on. Enjoy!